---
author: Siddhant Chaudhary 
category: Jekyll
date: 2024-07-07
title: Knowledge Base Management 
layout: post 
---

# Why you need this

Suppose you satisfy one or more of the following criteria:

1. You work with a lot of code.
2. You do scientific research and you read a lot of papers.
3. You love to read and write.
4. You are a project manager.
5. You love to make TODO lists and nice schedules for your work. 
6. You are a musician who wants to maintain their own library of compositions/playlists.
7. You attend a lot of meetings and you want a centralized way of managing your minutes.

All the above situations have something in common: it would be quite amazing and time-saving if you can set-up a centralized system, which is private to you, using which you can maintain your own *knowledge base*, i.e a nicely structured repository of ideas/work/papers/books, or really any other data you can think of, using which you can analyze your thoughts, collect them, and visualize them. This is exactly what a *knowledge base manager* does, and I'll describe one of the best tools for this: [`obsidian`](https://obsidian.md/).

> ##### The *Zettelkasten Method* 
>
> This is known as the *Zettelkasten Method*, wherein you create notes and connect them together to make a web of knowledge. [Read more about this method here](https://zettelkasten.de/overview/). 
{: .block-tip }

# The tools

For this post, I'll be using the following tools:

1. [`obsidian`](https://obsidian.md/).
2. [`syncthing`](https://syncthing.net/), for syncing directories between my linux machine and my Android tablet/phone.
3. [`papis`](https://github.com/papis/papis), for bibliography management and auto-fetching of papers from various providers.
4. `nvim`, my editor. You can use anything you want. I also use the [obsidian.nvim](https://github.com/epwalsh/obsidian.nvim) plugin to work with my Obsidian vault from `nvim`.
5. `git`, for version control. You can skip this if you don't want to backup your stuff to `git`. Or you can also use your favourite backup tool. I'll be using `git` because I won't backup any heavy-weight files (like videos or big PDFs).

> ##### This is just my setup 
>
> This post *does not explain* the workings of any of the mentioned tools. If you want to know how they work, just read the docs.
{: .block-warning }


# The setup

## Create the vault

Install all these tools any way you want. Once you do this, create a new Obsidian vault (check the [docs](https://help.obsidian.md/Home) if you want to; they're quite simple). One this is done, initialize a GitHub repository in your vault (with a corresponding remote, if you want). I'll assume that the path of the vault is `$HOME/obsidian-vault/`. Add the following to your `.gitignore`:

```sh
.obsidian/*
!.obsidian/app.json
!.obsidian/appearance.json
!.obsidian/config
!.obsidian/community-plugins.json
!.obsidian/core-plugins.json
!.obsidian/graph.json
!.obsidian/hotkeys.json
```

Basically, ignore everything except a few configuration files which you can use to configure your Obsidian instance.

## Create the `papis` library

The next important component of our setup will be a [`papis`](https://github.com/papis/papis) library. Since I read a lot of computer science papers, I'll set-up a library called `obsidian_research_paper_notes` inside my vault, which will contain all the metadata associated to the papers which I've included in the library, along with any notes I need to make while reading those papers, along with (possibly hand-annotated) PDFs of the papers. For instance, here's my `papis` config (both the global config and the config specific to the `obsidian_research_paper_notes` library):

### The `papis` config

```ini
[settings]
add-confirm = true
browser = brave-browser
default-library = papers
editor = nvim
formatter = python
picktool = fzf
search-engine = https://www.google.com

[obsidian_research_paper_notes]
add-folder-name = ``{doc[title]}``
dir = ~/obsidian-vault/research_paper_notes
notes-name = notes_{doc[ref]}.tex
notes-template = ~/obsidian-vault/research_paper_notes/notes-template.md
opentool = zathura
```

Particularly, note the `add-folder-name` field: instead of the default hash included in the folder name generated by `papis`, I use the title of the paper to name the folder in which the paper will be contained. This is useful because it makes it easier to find papers when I'm reading them on my Android tablet. To know more about how `papis` configuration works, [read their documentation](https://papis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configuration.html).

### A template file for markdown notes in `papis`

When I read papers, I also make my own notes for them (i.e `papis edit --notes`). I use markdown files for this, since they are the easiest to work with and render. To follow a nice template for `papis` notes, add a file called `notes-template.md` to the `$HOME/obsidian-vault/research_paper_notes/` directory: 

```markdown
# Title: {doc[title]} 

**URL:** {doc[url]}

**Authors:** {doc[author]}
```

Essentially, whenever you're editing notes for a particular paper, `papis` will automatically populate the markdown file with the title of the paper, it's list of authors and the URL of the paper (if you're using an importer like `arxiv` or `doi`).

### Ignore PDFs

I don't want to backup any PDFs to my `git` repository, since I can always fetch them whenever I want. It is only the `.yaml` files and the notes which I want to backup. So, I add this to `$HOME/obsidian-vault/research_paper_notes/.gitignore`:

```sh
*.pdf
```

## Sync across devices

I only access my vault on my linux machine, and my Android devices (a Samsung Galaxy Tab and an Android phone). For this, I use [`syncthing`](https://syncthing.net/). The process is simple: just sync your Obsidian vault. Make sure that all the endpoints are set to *send and receive*.

However, there's no point to sync any `git` specific files or other kinds of metadata to your Android device (unless you're using [`termux`](https://termux.dev/en/) on your device to perform `git` operations). So, I add a `.stignore` file to my vault's root to not sync any of these files:

```sh
.gitignore
.git/
research_paper_notes/*/*.yaml
```

## Visualize

You're all set! Now you can freely add new papers, notes, documents, or anything else to your vault! I love to use Obsidian's knowledge graph to visualize relationships between my ideas.

You can even annotate research paper PDFs on your Android device (I do it on my tablet using a stylus), and the changes will reflect on your linux machine too!
