---
author: Siddhant Chaudhary
category: Jekyll
date: 2025-05-17
title: Math/CS theory tools
layout: post
---

Link:
[https://codetalker7.github.io/theorycstools/](https://codetalker7.github.io/theorycstools/){:target="\_blank"}

Essentially, this is going to be a series of notes. The point of these notes is
to highlight some interesting theoretical tools that one might encounter in CS
theory research, but which are general enough to be discussed independently; so
in some sense, this is a toolkit which I may refer to if I see some relevance to
a new problem statement. I'll also include theoretical constructions which were
difficult for me to understand immediately, so this library should act as a
quick reference. On the other hand, readers who simply want to get some idea of
how CS research problems and their solutions look like may benefit from these
notes.

Some remarks:

- I'll always try to reference actual papers (mostly in AI/ML/Security theory)
  which use the mentioned technique. So, the reader will get an actual
  application of the said tool in relevant research.
- I'll also include references to any books or articles that discuss a more
  general or thorough treatment of the said tool.
- At the same time, I'll include the prerequisites needed to understand the
  given content.
- I will entirely skip difficult/boring proofs. The point of this toolkit should
  not be proofs/boring technical details. Rather, a bird's eye view of the
  significance of the tool, especially focusing on what it means and what it
  achieves.

Here's a list of all the notes in this series:

1. [Conditional Distributions](https://codetalker7.github.io/theorycstools/conditional-distributions.html){:target="\_blank"}
