---
author: Siddhant Chaudhary
category: Jekyll
date: 2025-06-21
title: Grad School Admissions
layout: post
---

This post is about my experience with the Fall 2025 Computer Science PhD
application cycle, primarily for US-based universities. I'm writing this mainly
to document my own understanding of PhD applications and provide other useful
references for future PhD applicants. Since there are
[already](https://mehtaver.se/how-to-write-a-statement-of-purpose-for-grad-school/)
[many](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~pavlo/blog/2015/10/how-to-write-a-bad-statement-for-a-computer-science-phd-admissions-application.html)
[blogs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pcqJBhQlFyTEPpRgAgN3r7wny6_Ql1PPXc_T1rPh210/edit?tab=t.0#)
and [write-ups](https://eugenielai.github.io/posts/another-annotated-sop.html)
on this subject, this page should serve more as a resource than a suggestion; I
highly recommend the reader to learn from the best and read as much of this
material as they can. While my focus will be on computer science research, I
believe that the overall process remains similar for other domains.

# Building a research profile and starting early

Think about why you want to do a PhD in the first place. This is an important
step to the process, and I myself spent around 2 years thinking about this.
Unlike undergrad or masters programs, one usually looks for a good _research
fit_ as a PhD applicant. Essentially, forget about university rankings, and
think more about the lab you're applying to. Inevitably, recognizing a lab which
will be a good fit for you will require good domain knowledge.

To build a competitive profile (especially for domains like machine
learning/artificial intelligence, where getting good PhD positions has become
extremely competitive), you should start working early. If you're interested in
AI/ML research, [start](https://icml.cc/) [going](https://iclr.cc/)
[through](https://neurips.cc/) [papers](https://aistats.org/)
[accepted](https://jmlr.org/tmlr/) [to](https://www.jmlr.org/)
[reputed](https://2025.aclweb.org/) [venues](https://2025.emnlp.org/). Use tools
like [alphaXiv](https://www.alphaxiv.org/explore) to find new papers. Use
[csrankings](https://csrankings.org/#/index?all&us) to find researchers working
in different areas of computer science (more on this later) and read their
papers. Once you read enough papers, you'll get a good idea of your interests
and the kind of work you want to do. You'll also learn a lot about how CS
research looks like, how papers are written and overall what topics people are
interested in. The next step will be _getting research experience_.

The best way to get research experience is to contact professors who work in
your area of interest, and to work on long-term projects with them (work which
eventually leads to good publications). If you're not in school, _research
assistantships_ (aka _RAships_) are a way to go. In my case, I worked as an RA
at the
[Learning and Networks Group](https://www.tifr.res.in/~abhishek.sinha/group.html)
(during my masters) and the
[Laboratory for Computational Social Systems](https://www.lcs2.in/) (after
completing my masters). My work spanned both theoretical areas in ML (online
convex optimization) and applications (LLMs) and helped me prepare well for my
PhD applications. _Pre-doctoral research programs_ (also sometimes called _AI
residency programs_) are another great way of getting this research experience.
I'm aware of such programs at Google Research, Microsoft Research, and IBM.
[Here is a nice repository containing a list of AI residency programs](https://github.com/dangkhoasdc/awesome-ai-residency).
Alternatively, _research SDE_ jobs are another great way of getting research
experience. In fact, many open source orgs like
[HuggingFace](https://apply.workable.com/huggingface/) (or, recently
[ggml-org](https://github.com/ggml-org)) hire for research + development roles.
I should point out that these jobs require a relatively high bar of ML + systems
skills.

However, my take on these residency programs will be to consider them with a
grain of salt. I've personally known and encountered cases of favoritism and
highly unprofessional attitudes from some of these programs. In any case, once
you've taken these steps and built a good research profile for yourself, you can
think of taking the next step. Through your experience, try to get good quality
first-author publications, and make sure you're well aware of work in proximity
to your research problems.

# The timeline

For the Fall 2025 application cycle, most US universities had deadlines in the
first two weeks of December 2024. Infact, most US universities also follow an
[April 15 Resolution](https://cgsnet.org/resources/for-current-prospective-graduate-students/april-15-resolution)
which give applicants time till April 15 (of the given year) to consider their
decisions for enrollment. Though this is _not_ binding (and many universities
didn't follow it for the 2025 cycle), it roughly gives a good estimate of the
overall timeline of the application process. After completing the application
process, I started receiving invites for interviews during the early part of
January 2025. All interviews were finished by the end of January 2025, and I got
to know about my acceptances in early January and mid-February.

The application timelines for European universities vary a lot and depend on the
advisor/research group as well. I've heard of people applying to PhD positions
throughout the year. I applied to one European university (based in
Netherlands), and the application process for that position was between January
and February; I was told of my acceptance in mid-February.

The December deadline is for all components of the application (which I'll
discuss in a bit). My advise, as before, will be to start as soon as possible. A
big part of the application involves a lot of writing; _do not leave this to the
very end of the timeline_.

# Application materials

Roughly, all applications have this format:

1. An application form (sometimes with questions phrased as prompts to be
   completed).
2. A statement of purpose (SOP).
3. A personal statement (not required for many universities).
4. A resume (CV).
5. Atleast three letters of recommendation (LORs).
6. TOEFL/IELTS scores (no GRE required).

A lot has been written about how to write the SOP and the how to build a good
resume; it will be pointless for me re-iterate those points here. Instead, I
again recommend the readers to learn from the best. For starters,
[go through
this website to get a lot of examples of SOPs written by really talented
applicants](https://cs-sop.notion.site/CS-PhD-Statements-of-Purpose-df39955313834889b7ac5411c37b958d).
Particularly, try to see the structure of the SOPs. You'll notice that there's
no one template that works, and infact different applications have different
writing styles. Still, having structure in your SOP makes it easy to follow.
[Checkout Stanford's guidelines on writing nice SOPs](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NdddMIXH3bt0jgJuf-BwAGxdqUqUNmOV/view).
Additionally, check out the links I posted on the top of this page. For the
personal statement,
[I found this example](https://eugenielai.github.io/docs/application/ps-cal-eylai.pdf)
by [Eugenie Y. Lai](https://eugenielai.github.io/) to be quite appealing. Also
check out
[Berkeley's guidelines for the personal statement](https://grad.berkeley.edu/admissions/steps-to-apply/requirements/personal-statement/).

**Application support programs.** Additionally, you can sign up for application
support programs by various universities. These programs can sign you up with a
grad student from a reputed university who will assist you in graduate
applications, either by giving single/multiple rounds of feedback, or even
full-fledged assistance in some cases. Check out the
[MIT GAAP](https://eecs-gaap.mit.edu/),
[Stanford](https://www.cs.stanford.edu/admissions-student-resources),
[Cornell](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdEqaXbSr3nRGzWDqdffuwFns0dGCVhTTHC6nGJ9PdU0ms2_g/closedform)
and [Princeton's](https://www.cs.princeton.edu/grad/admissions-requirements)
support programs. Also look up other support programs. As always, _apply for
them early_ (I unfortunately missed two deadlines that I wanted to apply to, due
to laziness).

# Finding potential advisors

Now this is the most important part. When you're going for a PhD position,
you're not just signing up for research; you'll be spending the prime years of
your life in a new environment, working closely with a small group of people.
_The most important of these people will be your advisor_. So finding the right
advisor for you is probably the most important aspect of your applications.

For this, I recommend the following three ways of finding good people to work
with:

1. Look up authors of papers that you've read or referenced in your research.
   There's a high chance that those people work in your area of interest, and
   it'll be a big plus if you have done research in an intersecting area. This
   is how I found the person who I wanted to work with.

2. Use [csrankings](https://csrankings.org/#/index?all&us). This website
   essentially collects all the information you'll need about CS professors and
   universities. Use this after step 1.

3. Finally, look up the faculty lists of the universities you want to apply to.
   This takes a lot of time, but is another way of finding potential advisors.

Among the three methods above, I highly recommend the first method. Not only
will your research interests align with the person of interest, it's also a
pretty good way to showcase expertise and interest in a specific area, and in
some cases can even lead to interactions with your potential advisor even before
you submit your PhD applications. It's also a good idea to reach out to
former/current students of the person you want to work with, to get an
understanding about their work, lab culture etc.

**A note about contacting professors.** A common doubt for a PhD applicant is
whether he/she should email a professor prior to submission of the PhD
application. The answer to this varies; it's best to look up the homepage of the
professor you want to contact, since they usually write about this explicitly.

# LORs and planning for the worst

Letters of recommendation (aka LORs) are probably the most important aspect of a
PhD application. _Choose your recommenders wisely_. I would suggest to go with
professors who you've worked with closely for long periods of time (work which
has a duration of upto 1-2 years). It goes without saying that the more
successful research you do with your referee, the better the LOR will be.

A common concern for people who haven't worked with multiple professors is about
the choice of the third LOR. Sometimes it's not possible to find a third LOR
writer who works at a university. In such cases, I'd like to point out that most
universities recommend two LOR writers to be professors, while the third LOR
could also come from someone working in the industry.

Finally, _I have a word of caution_: ask your LOR writers well in advance
(ideally, atleast a month before the application deadline). Also, _prepare for
the worst_: have backup LOR writers if possible. In my case, two LOR writers
either refused or didn't reply to me after saying yes to writing an LOR (due to
which my applications were on the verge of being desk-rejected). Send them
regular reminders in intervals, and give them plenty of time. Also, _do not_
wait for your recommenders before completing your part of the application. In
the worst case, wherein your recommender fails to upload a letter before the
deadline, contact the university immediately and ask for a replacement. In some
cases, LOR deadlines can be relaxed even upto a month after the application
deadline (but it varies across universities).

# The interviews

PhD interviews are usually informal and last about 30 minutes to an hour, since
your application should be good enough to represent you as a candidate. In any
case, some preparation for PhD interviews is always in order. Particularly, know
the ins and outs of your research, and if possible, of problems adjacent to your
own work. Be prepared to answer technical questions. Sometimes, to make the
interviews more structured, professors could also give you some reference papers
to read prior to the interview, and may ask you to present the overall ideas of
the paper during the interview. Don't stress too much about the interviews, and
treat them as an opportunity to interact with your potential advisor. Ask them
questions related to their work, their lab, and their style of advising. This
information will go a long way both for you and your potential advisor to figure
out whether you two are good for each other.

# The final verdict

Most people get their acceptances between late January and mid March. While the
process could be stressful, it is important to know that luck is often a big
factor in determining the final outcome. No matter how good of an SOP or LORs
you have or how good research you've done, know that sometimes things could go
wrong because of circumstances not in your control. At the end of the day, it is
important for a PhD applicant to remember that _even applying to a PhD program_
means that you're passionate about research and that it's probably fun to you.
Those reasons are good enough for you to keep going despite any temporary
shortcomings in your research life :)
